International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD)
Volume 9 Issue 5, Sep-Oct 2025 Available Online: www.ijtsrd.com e-ISSN: 2456 – 6470

Machine Learning: An Overview
Matthew N. O. Sadiku1, Samuel A. Ajayi2, Janet O. Sadiku3
1

Roy G. Perry College of Engineering, Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, TX, USA
2
Texas Southern University, Houston, TX, USA
3
Juliana King University, Houston, TX, USA

ABSTRACT
Machine learning (ML) is a branch of artificial intelligence that
performs data analysis tasks without explicit instructions. It is about
learning some properties of a data set and applying them to new data.
It refers to the automated detection of meaningful patterns in a given
data. It involves using the past experience to optimize the
performance of a given algorithm. ML algorithms open up a realm
where computers analyze and learn from data to make predictions
and decisions. As machine learning continues to evolve, its uses are
set to revolutionize how we engage with technology, becoming an
essential part of everyday life. This paper provides an overview of
machine learning.

How to cite this paper: Matthew N. O.
Sadiku | Samuel A. Ajayi | Janet O.
Sadiku "Machine Learning: An
Overview" Published in International
Journal of Trend in
Scientific Research
and Development
(ijtsrd), ISSN: 24566470, Volume-9 |
Issue-5,
October
IJTSRD97693
2025,
pp.11211131,
URL:
www.ijtsrd.com/papers/ijtsrd97693.pdf

KEYWORDS: machine learning, artificial intelligence, prediction,
deep learning.

Copyright © 2025 by author (s) and
International Journal of Trend in
Scientific Research and Development
Journal. This is an
Open Access article
distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY 4.0)
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)

INTRODUCTION
Technology is becoming more and more intelligent as
scientists, engineers, and programmers teach
computers to learn independently. Robots and
machines have been occupying mankind for several
centuries. Machine learning is the concept that a
computer program can learn and adapt to new data
without human intervention. It is focused on teaching
computers to learn from data and to improve with
experience – instead of being explicitly programmed
to do so. It is used in different sectors for various
reasons. It can be applied in a variety of areas, such as
in investing, advertising, marketing, ecommerce,
banking, organizing news, fraud detection, and more
[1].
Machine learning (ML) is the discipline that gives
computers the ability to learn without being explicitly
programmed. It is the science of facilitating
computers to learn from past experience. It is a field
within computer science and is closely related to
artificial intelligence (AI) and computational
statistics. It may also be regarded as a branch of
artificial intelligence (AI) that trains algorithms on
data to build models capable of doing things usually

reserved for humans, like sorting images, analyzing
patterns, or predicting trends. Artificial intelligence is
an umbrella term for different strategies and
techniques used to make machines more human-like.
ML is based on the idea that machines should be able
to learn and adapt through experience.
WHAT IS MACHINE LEARNING?
Machine learning is a subfield of artificial
intelligence that uses algorithms trained on data sets
to create models capable of performing tasks that
would otherwise only be possible for humans, such as
categorizing images, analyzing data, or predicting
price fluctuations. It uses algorithms (essentially lists
of rules) trained on data sets to create self-learning
models capable of predicting outcomes and
classifying information without human intervention.
It focuses on algorithms that can “learn” the patterns
of training data and, subsequently, make accurate
inferences about new data. This pattern recognition
ability enables machine learning models to make
decisions or predictions without explicit, hard-coded
instructions. To ensure such algorithms work
effectively, however, they must typically be refined

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1121

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

many times until they accumulate a comprehensive
list of instructions that allow them to function
correctly [2]. A symbol of machine learning is shown
in Figure 1 [3].
Generally speaking, a learning problem considers a
set of samples of data and then tries to predict
properties of unknown data. ML builds heavily on
statistics because when we train a machine to learn,
we have to give it a statistically significant random
sample as training data. Intelligent machines are
increasing doing incredible things: Facebook
recognizes faces in photos, Siri understands voices,
and Google translates websites [4].
Machine learning techniques are transforming many
fields including computer science, engineering,
mathematics, physics, neuroscience, and cognitive
science. We are surrounded by ML-based
technologies: search engines learn how to bring us the
best results, digital cameras learn to detect faces,
credit card transactions are secured by a software that
detects frauds, and cars are equipped with accident
prevention systems that are built using ML algorithms
[5]. In ML, data plays an indispensable role, and the
learning algorithm is used to learn from the data. ML
algorithms are now easy to use. One can download
packages in Python. Programming languages used in
ML include C++, Java, Python.
As its name indicates, machine learning works by
creating computer-based statistical models that are
refined for a given purpose by evaluating training
data, rather than by the classical approach where
programmers develop a static algorithm that attempts
to solve a problem. Because the algorithm adjusts as
it evaluates training data, the process of exposure and
calculation around new data trains the algorithm to
become better at what it does. Algorithms are the
computational part of a machine learning project.
Once trained, algorithms produce models with a
statistical probability of answering a question or
achieving a goal. Unlike in expert systems, the logic
by which a machine learning model operates is not
explicitly programmed; it is learned through
experience. Machine learning has come to dominate
the field of AI: it provides the backbone of most
modern AI systems, from forecasting models to
autonomous vehicles to large language models
(LLMs) and other generative AI tools. Machine
learning has become a household term in recent years
as the concept moved from science fiction to a key
driver of how businesses and organizations process
information [6].
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Actual efforts towards machine learning did not begin
until the 1950s, at a time when computers were still in

their infancy and artificial intelligence could only be
dreamed of. In 1950, Turing developed the Turing
Test, a kind of game in which a computer pretends to
be human. From then on, scientists began to trust
their computers even more with more complex
thinking tasks. The term “machine learning” was
coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel, an American
pioneer in the field of computer gaming and artificial
intelligence while working at IBM. More recently, in
1997, Tom M. Mitchell at Carnegie Mellon
University provided a widely quoted, more formal
definition of the algorithms studied in the machine
learning field: "A computer program is said to learn
from experience E with respect to some class of tasks
T and performance measure P if its performance at
tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with
experience E” [7]. Figure 2 show the evolution of
machine learning [8].
HOW MACHINE LEARNING WORKS
Machine learning uses algorithms—basically rulebased instructions—trained on past data to make
predictions or classifications when faced with new
input. Raw data is cleaned and transformed to train a
machine learning model. The preprocessed data is
used to train the machine learning algorithm. The
algorithm tries to iteratively identify the mathematical
correlation between the input and expected output
from the training data.
Once ready, these trained algorithms become
"machine learning models"—tools capable of tasks
like recognizing images, forecasting housing prices,
or even playing chess. The goal is to ensure the model
can generalize beyond the training dataset. The
central idea behind machine learning is an existing
mathematical relationship between any input and
output data combination. The machine learning model
does not know this relationship in advance but can
guess if sufficient examples of input-output data sets
are given. In more advanced cases, multiple
algorithms are stacked to form complex systems
known as deep learning networks. Figure 3 shows
how machine learning works [3].
TYPES OF MACHINE LEARNING
Machine learning algorithms can be supervised or
unsupervised. Basically, developers differentiate
between supervised learning and unsupervised
learning, with gradual intermediate stages. Besides
these two main areas, there is also semi-supervised
learning, reinforcement learning, and active learning.
In addition, a distinction is made between shallow
learning and deep learning. The relationship between
some of these types of machine learning is shown in
Figure 4 [9]. Different types of machine learning are
explained below [10]:

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1122

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

 Supervised Learning: The program is “trained” on
a pre-defined set of “training examples” from a
“teacher,” which then facilitate its ability to reach
an accurate conclusion when given new data. In
this case, the data comes with additional attributes
that we want to predict. A common case of
supervised learning is to use historical data to
predict statistically likely future events. Under
supervised ML, we have regression ML and
classification ML. Similarity learning is an area of
supervised machine learning closely related to
regression and classification, but the goal is to
learn from examples using a similarity function
that measures how similar or related two objects
are.
 Unsupervised Learning: As their name suggests,
unsupervised learning algorithms can be broadly
understood
as
somewhat
“optimizing
themselves.” Unsupervised algorithms do not
need to be trained with desired outcome data. The
program is given a bunch of data and must find
patterns and relationships therein. A typical goal
of unsupervised learning may be as
straightforward as discovering hidden patterns
within a dataset. Without being told a “correct”
answer, unsupervised learning methods can look
at complex data and organize it in potentially
meaningful ways. Unsupervised learning
algorithms are used for more complex processing
tasks than supervised learning systems.
 Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning
models are trained holistically through trial and
error. Reinforcement learning is a method with
reward values attached to the different steps that
the algorithm must go through. So, the model’s
goal is to accumulate as many reward points as
possible and eventually reach an end goal.
Reinforcement learning is an area of machine
learning concerned with how software agents
ought to take actions in an environment so as to
maximise some notion of cumulative reward.
 Classification Learning: This involves seeking a
yes-or-no prediction, such as “Does this product
meet our quality standard.” We want to learn
from already labeled data how to predict the class
of unlabeled data. An example of classification
problem would be the handwritten digit
recognition example.
 Regression Learning: If the desired output
consists of one or more continuous variables, then
the task is called regression. In this case, the value
being predicted falls somewhere on a spectrum.
An example of a regression problem would be the

prediction of the length of a salmon as a function
of its age and weight.
 Deep Learning: Deep learning (DL) is a
specialized form of machine learning that uses
artificial neural networks to mimic the human
brain. It is a type of machine learning technique
that is modeled on the human brain. It is an
advanced technique for handling complex tasks
like image and speech recognition. The way in
which neural networks are trained can be
described as deep learning. It is called deep
because the network of neurons is arranged in
several hierarchical levels. Deep learning laid the
foundation for advances in generative artificial
intelligence. Figure 5 shows the relationship
between AI, ML, and DL: deep learning is a
subset of machine learning, which is itself a
subset of artificial intelligence [11].
APPLICATIONS
Machine learning used to power applications like
recommendation engines, fraud detection, and
medical diagnostics by enabling systems to learn
from experience and data, rather than being explicitly
programmed for every task. There is a growing
recognition that ML can play a key role in a wide
range of critical applications such as data mining,
natural language processing, image recognition,
expert systems, simulation, agriculture, medicine, and
manufacturing. Some of these application areas are
shown in Figure 6 [12]. ML has been applied to each
of these with great success. A sample of ML
applications are provided next [10,13,14].
1. Healthcare: Using ML algorithms is a fastgrowing trend in the healthcare industry. The
proliferation of wearable sensors and devices has
generated significant healthcare data. Wearable
devices and sensors can be used to assess a
patient's health in real time. The medical experts
can analyze data to identify trends or red flags.
ML algorithms can process more information and
spot more patterns than their human counterparts.
They have immense potential to enhance
diagnostic and intervention research in smoking,
depression, asthma, and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) [6]. They can also be
used to predict diabetes complications. ML has
been applied to pharmacology for improved
therapy. Figure 7 is a representation of machine
learning in healthcare [15].
2. Financial Services: ML models have been
successful in finance applications.
Financial machine learning projects improve risk
analytics and regulation. Businesses in the

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1123

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

financial industry use ML technology for two key
purposes: to prevent fraud and identify investment
opportunities, or help investors know when to
trade. Banks use it for credit-card fraud detection.
ML is getting better and better at spotting
potential cases of fraud. It can also be used to
predict bankruptcy and credit risk management. A
financial organization could train a machine
learning system to classify fraudulent and genuine
transactions. The system identifies patterns in
known data to accurately guess or predict whether
a new transaction is genuine. Financial services
use machine learning and quantitative tools to
make predictions about their prospects and
customers. With this information, banks can
answer questions like who is likely to default on a
loan, which customers pose high or low risks, and
which customers are the most lucrative to target
resources.
3. Retail: For retailers, machine learning can help
operations, sales, and more. Retail can use
machine learning to improve customer service,
stock management, upselling, and cross-channel
marketing. For example, Amazon Fulfillment
(AFT) cut infrastructure costs by 40 percent using
a machine learning model to identify misplaced
inventory. This helps them deliver on Amazon’s
promise that an item will be readily available to
customers and arrive on time.
4. Media and Entertainment: Entertainment
companies turn to machine learning to better
understand their target audiences and deliver
immersive, personalized, and on-demand content.
For example, Disney uses machine learning to
archive its media library. Machine learning tools
automatically tag, describe, and sort media
content, enabling Disney writers and animators to
quickly search for and familiarize themselves
with Disney characters.
5. Transportation: The transportation industry relies
on making routes more efficient and predicting
potential problems. The data analysis and
modeling aspects of ML are important tools for
public transportation and other transportation
organizations.
6. Image Recognition: This is one of the most
common uses of ML. There are also speech
recognition, facial detection/recognition, object
recognition, and character recognition. In speech
recognition (also known as computer speech
recognition), a software application recognizes
spoken words.

7. Manufacturing: This is an area where the
application of machine learning is very fruitful.
The manufacturing industry today is facing an
increasing volume of data which compromise a
variety of different formats, semantics, and
quality. ML techniques have been successfully
utilized in various process optimization,
monitoring and control applications in
manufacturing. Machine learning can support
predictive maintenance, quality control, and
innovative research in the manufacturing sector.
For example, manufacturing giant 3M uses
machine learning to innovate sandpaper.
8. Marketing: Machine learning already has
important functions for marketing. At the
moment, however, it is primarily large companies
that use the functions internally, such as Google.
9. Science: The intelligent processing of big data is
an enormous relief for empirically working
scientists. Machine learning also helps in
medicine: even today, some doctors use artificial
intelligence for diagnosis and treatment. Machine
learning is also used for forecasting illnesses such
as diabetes and heart attacks.
10. Robots: Robots are everywhere, especially in
factories. They help, for example, with mass
production if they are programmed to carry out
consistent work steps. If self-learning systems are
used in robotics, these machines should also be
able to master new tasks. These developments
are, of course, also very interesting for other
areas: from space travel to the home, robots with
artificial intelligence will be used in numerous
areas.
11. Autonomous Vehicles: One of machine learning’s
big flagship products is the self-driving or
autonomous car. Self-driving cars, a wonder of
the 21st century, rely on deep learning models, as
a specialized form of machine learning, to process
sensor data, recognize road conditions, and make
real-time driving decisions. Vehicles can
maneuver themselves through actual traffic
without causing accidents. This can only be
achieved through machine learning, since it is not
possible to program all situations that could
possibly occur. For this reason, it is imperative
for cars to be able to navigate themselves using
intelligent machines.
12. Personal Assistants: Computer systems that are
able to constantly learn also play an important
role in your home. This is how simple homes
become smart homes. Personal assistants such as
Google Home and Amazon Echo also use

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1124

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

machine learning technologies to help them better
understand their users. But many people now
carry their assistants with them at all times: With
Siri, Cortana, or Google Assistant, users can use
voice control to send commands and questions to
their smartphones.
13. Gaming: Since research began on artificial
intelligence, scientists have been greatly
motivated by how well machines are able to play
games. Self-learning systems pitted themselves
against humans in games of chess, checkers, and
Go from China. Computer game developers also
use machine learning to make their games more
interesting. Game designers can use machine
learning to create the most balanced gameplay
possible.
Other potential applications include simulation, face
recognition, object recognition, speech recognition,
natural language processing (NLP), optical character
recognition, affective computing, Internet fraud,
medical diagnosis, IoT, stock market prediction,
economics, automotive, defense and security,
government, insurance, utilities, oil and gas,
advertisement, email spam detection, drug
recognition, education, social science, linguistics,
management, computer vision, materials science,
smart city, and remote sensing, and communication
networks such wireless sensor networks and mobile
ad-hoc networks (MANETs).
BENEFITS
Machine learning technology can process large
quantities of historical data, identify patterns, and
predict new relationships between previously
unknown data. It leverages data and algorithms to
enable AI systems to learn and improve in a manner
similar to humans, progressively enhancing their
accuracy over time. A good machine learning model
is crucial to ML applications. Other benefits of
machine learning include the following [8,16]:
 Automation: Machine learning makes it easier to
automate operations. Machine learning automates
and optimizes the process of data collection,
classification, and analysis. Machine learning
algorithms can filter, sort, and classify data
without human intervention. They can summarize
reports, scan documents, transcribe audio, and tag
content—tasks that are tedious and timeconsuming for humans to perform. Since modern
systems can independently adapt to new
conditions with the help of machine learning,
complex automations processes are also possible.
 Limitations: Although machine learning has been
transformative in some fields, machine-learning

programs often fail to deliver expected results.
Reasons for this are numerous: lack of (suitable)
data, lack of access to the data, data bias, privacy
problems, badly chosen tasks and algorithms,
wrong tools and people, lack of resources, and
evaluation problems. For example, attempts to use
machine learning in healthcare with the IBM
Watson system failed to deliver even after years
of time and billions of dollars invested.
 Enhanced Decision-making: Machine learning
systems can process and analyze massive data
volumes quickly and accurately. Organizations
can make data-driven decisions at runtime and
respond more effectively to changing conditions.
They can optimize operations and mitigate risks
with confidence.
 Personalization: Machine learning has opened a
new door for customer experiences through
personalization. Machine learning transforms
customer experiences through personalization.
For example, retailers recommend products to
customers based on previous purchases, browsing
history, and search patterns. The personalized
approach increases customer retention and brand
loyalty.
 Continuous Improvement: A distinctive advantage
of machine learning is its ability to improve as it
processes more data. Machine learning systems
adapt and learn from new data. They adjust and
enhance their performance to remain practical and
relevant over time.
 Generative AI: Generative AI tools like ChatGPT,
Google Gemini, and Microsoft Copilot are
becoming increasingly prevalent in professional
settings. Technically, generative AI relies on
sophisticated machine learning methods.
However, its practical use differs from traditional
machine learning. While conventional models are
typically designed to carry out specific, repetitive
tasks, generative AI focuses on producing novel
and adaptive outputs in response to user input.
 Predictive Analytics: Businesses are using
machine learning to look into the future.
Predictive analytics uses historical data to forecast
trends, helping companies make informed
decisions. Whether it is predicting customer
demand or identifying potential risks, machine
learning helps businesses stay ahead of the curve.
While descriptive analytics focuses on analyzing
historical data and deriving inferences from them,
predictive analytics focuses on predicting and
understanding what could happen in the future.

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1125

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

 Predictive
Maintenance:
By
predictive
maintenance, machine learning models can
analyze vehicle performance data to detect
potential mechanical failures before they occur.
ML uses patterns learned from training data to
make predictions about new, unseen data. By
analyzing data obtained from the different
machines, models can be generated that are
capable of predicting when a failure will occur.
This serves to improve processes and prevent
failures before machines break down. In 2006, the
media-services provider Netflix held the first
"Netflix Prize" competition to find a program to
better predict user preferences and improve the
accuracy of its existing algorithm by at least 10%.
When maintenance and repair data is collected
manually, it is almost impossible to predict
potential problems, let alone automate processes
to predict and prevent them.
 Data Compression: Data compression aims to
reduce the size of data files, enhancing storage
efficiency and speeding up data transmission.
There is a close connection between machine
learning and compression. An optimal compressor
can be used for prediction. An alternative view
can show compression algorithms implicitly map
strings into implicit feature space vectors, and
compression-based similarity measures compute
similarity within these feature spaces.
 Data Mining: Machine learning and data mining
often employ the same methods and overlap
significantly. While machine learning focuses on
prediction, based on known properties learned
from the training data, data mining focuses on the
discovery of (previously) unknown properties in
the data. Data mining uses many machine
learning methods, but with different goals; on the
other hand, machine learning also employs data
mining methods as "unsupervised learning" to
improve learner accuracy.
CHALLENGES
A major challenge of increasing importance is the
question what ML technique and model to choose.
Most ML algorithms are time-intensive and energyinefficient since they require several days or months
to train a good model. The algorithms can be
accelerated with graphic processing units (GPUs) and
field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). Although
the complexity of ML has restricted its use, the
supply of competent ML designers has yet to catch up
to this demand. Other challenges in machine learning
implementation include the following [16,17]:
 Data Quality: The adage “garbage in, garbage
out” applies to machine learning—the quality of

data is critical, during both the training phase and
in production. Typically, machine learning
models require a high quantity of reliable data to
perform accurate predictions. High-quality data
can lead to more accurate results delivered in a
timely, efficient manner; low-quality data can
create inaccuracies and distortion in resultant
models. A machine learning model's performance
depends on the data quality used for training.
Issues such as missing values, inconsistent data
entries, and noise can significantly degrade model
accuracy. Lack of a sufficiently large dataset can
prevent the model from learning effectively.
Typically, machine learning models require a
high quantity of reliable data to perform accurate
predictions.
 Data Security: Despite its many benefits, machine
learning can introduce a range of security issues.
The data used in ML analysis may contain
sensitive or proprietary information not meant for
public consumption. Data preparation steps can
both expose and address security vulnerabilities,
particularly when data sets go through export or
import processes between systems. Machine
learning can enhance data security by detecting
and responding to cybersecurity threats in realtime. ML algorithms can identify unusual patterns
that may indicate a data breach, ensuring patient
data remains protected.
 Data Privacy: One of the biggest concerns in
machine learning is data privacy. For machine
learning models to be effective, they need vast
amounts of data—often personal or sensitive
information. This raises important questions
about how that data is collected, stored, and used.
Ensuring sensitive data is not disclosed is an
ongoing effort. Data anonymization is an
emerging practice, but it may not always be
available or sufficient. Information needs to be
protected and used consistent with legal
requirements. For retailers, machine learning can
help operations, sales, and more.
 Overfitting and Underfitting: Overfitting occurs
when a machine learning model learns the details
and noise in the training data to the extent that it
negatively impacts the model's performance on
new data. On the other hand, underfitting happens
when a model cannot learn the underlying pattern
of the data, resulting in poor performance on both
the training and testing data. Balancing the
model's complexity and its ability to generalize is
a critical challenge. Even among ML experts,
selecting a good model can be a challenging task.

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1126

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

 Bias: Different machine learning approaches can
suffer from different data biases. Algorithmic bias
is a potential result of data not being fully
prepared for training. The data may be
imbalanced in many real-world applications. This
imbalance can bias the training process, causing
the model to perform well on the majority class
while failing to predict the minority class
accurately. For example, if historical data
prioritizes a certain demographic, machine
learning algorithms used in human resource
applications may continue to prioritize those
demographics.
 Model Explainability: Another challenge is the
interpretation of the results. As machine learning
models, particularly deep learning models,
become more complex, their decisions become
less interpretable. Developing methods to make
models more interpretable without sacrificing
performance is an important challenge.
 Scalability: Machine learning models, especially
those that involve large datasets or complex
algorithms like deep learning, require significant
computational resources. Training these models
can be time-consuming and costly. Optimizing
algorithms to reduce computational demands
involves challenges in algorithm design.
CONCLUSION
Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence
(AI) where algorithms learn from data to identify
patterns and make predictions or decisions with
minimal human intervention.
It is the process of teaching computers to
automatically recognize patterns of interest in data. It
is an incredibly powerful tool that is used in a wide
range of compelling application domains because it is
applicable to many real-life problems. Machine
learning is already transforming much of our world
for the better. The journey of machine learning is just
beginning, and the future holds incredible promise.
Machine learning is set to be a pillar of our future
civilization. It requires a strong foundation in
mathematics, statistics, coding, and data technologies.
Those wishing to advance in machine learning should
consider completing a master's degree in artificial
intelligence or data science. They can use online
courses to learn at their own pace and master specific
skills. Additional information on machine learning is
available in the books in [13,18-31].
REFERENCES
[1] “Understanding
example,”

machine learning: Uses,
April
2025,

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/machin
e-learning.asp
[2]

“What is machine learning? Definition, types,
and
examples,”
August
2025,
https://www.coursera.org/articles/what-ismachine-learning

[3]

N. Nguyen, “Understanding the core concept of
machine
learning,”
June
2025,
https://shiftasia.com/community/understandingthe-core-concept-of-machine-learning/

[4]

“Machine learning” Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning

[5]

S. Shalev-Shwartz and S. Ben-David,
Understanding Machine Learning: From
Theory to Algorithms. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press, 2014.

[6]

M. N. O. Sadiku, S. M. Musa, and O. S. Musa,
“Machine learning, ” International Research
Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science,
vol. 2, no. 4, 2017, pp. 79-81.

[7]

S. Mullainathan and J. Spiess, “Machine
learning: An applied econometric approach,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 31, no.
2, Spring 2017, pp. 87-106.

[8]

“Machine
learning
in
industry,”
https://atriainnovation.com/en/blog/machinelearning-in-industry/

[9]

D. Shewan, “10 Companies using machine
learning in cool ways,” November 2023,
https://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2017/07/
28/machine-learning-applications

[10]

T. Wuest et al., “Machine learning in
manufacturing: Advantages, challenges, and
applications,” Production & Manufacturing
Research, vol. 4, no. 1, 2016, pp. 23-45.

[11]

“What is machine learning? The ultimate
beginner's
guide,”
June
2021,
https://www.v7labs.com/blog/machinelearning-guide

[12]

“What is machine learning? Key concepts and
real-world
uses,”
February
2025,
https://ischool.syracuse.edu/what-is-machinelearning/

[13]

E. Alpaydm, Introduction to Machine
Learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 3rd
edition, 2014.

[14]

https://www.ionos.com/digitalguide/onlinemarketing/web-analytics/what-is-machinelearning-how-machines-learn-to-think/

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1127

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

[15]

“Benefits of machine learning in healthcare,”
https://www.foreseemed.com/blog/machinelearning-in-healthcare

[24]

C. Huyen, Designing Machine Learning
Systems: An Iterative Process for ProductionReady Applications. O'Reilly Media, 2022.

[16]

“What
is
machine
learning?” [25]
https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/machinelearning/?trk=80384a35-d261-4dc4-ae07058697ea891c&sc_channel=ps&ef_id=EAIaIQ
obChMIgbifjfWhkAMVbUH_AR09QBjwEAA [26]
YASAAEgJp9vD_BwE:G:s&s_kwcid=AL!442
2!3!751258939107!e!!g!!machine%20learning!
22542047959!178682823585&gad_campaignid
=22542047959&gbraid=0AAAAADjHtp96vt_ [27]
Q7N2DALMz6zQTWDGDN&gclid=EAIaIQo
bChMIgbifjfWhkAMVbUH_AR09QBjwEAA
YASAAEgJp9vD_BwE

Y. H. Liu, Python Machine Learning by
Example: Unlock Machine Learning Best
Practices With Real-World Use Cases. Packt
Publishing, 4th edition, 2024.

[17]

M. Chen, “What is machine learning?”
November
2024,
https://www.oracle.com/artificialintelligence/machine-learning/what-is-machinelearning/

[18]

G. Rebala, A. Ravi, and S. Churiwala, An
Introduction to Machine Learning. Springer,
2019.

[19]

Y. Kodratoff, An Introduction to Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufman Publ., 1988.

[20]

B. Boehmke and B. M. Greenwell, Hands-On
Machine Learning with R. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 2019.

[21]

T. Danka, Mathematics of Machine Learning:
Master Linear Algebra, Calculus, and
Probability for Machine Learning. Packt
Publishing, 2025.

[22]

J. James, The Ultimate Guide to Machine
Learning With Python Programming for
Beginners: Mastering Python Fundamentals for
Machine Learning With Practical Coding ...
Chapter To Bring Yourself to the Next Level.
Independently Published, 2025.

[23]

O. Theobald, Machine Learning for Absolute
Beginners: A Plain English Introduction.
Independently Published, third edition, 2021.

P. Singh, Fundamentals and Methods of
Machine and Deep Learning Algorithms, Tools,
and Applications. Wiley, 2022.
S. Hack, Machine Learning for Beginners A
Math Guide to Mastering Deep Learning and
Business Application. Understand How
Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, and
Neural Networks Work Through Real
Examples. Chopra International Consulting
Limited, 2021

[28]

Ajayi, A.S., Kim, S. & Yun, R. Study of
developing a condensation heat transfer
coefficient and pressure drop model for whole
reduced pressure ranges. Int. J. Air-Cond.
Ref.32, 15 (2024).

[29]

Ajayi, A., Badmus, O., Iheuwa, G., Ehizojie,
L., & Segun, S. (2025). Comparative Analysis
of GitOps Tools and Frameworks. Path of
Science, 11(5), 2017-2030.

[30]

Ajayi, A. S., Abimbola, J., Segun, S. E., Ajayi,
E. I., & Bodude, A. D. (2026). Harnessing
artificial intelligence for methane emissions
control in industrial natural gas engines:
Optimizing exhaust after treatment to advance
U.S. clean energy goals–A review. European
Journal of Sustainable Development Research,
10(1), em0345.

[31]

Oyetunji, O. R., Ajayi, A. Samuel, Amuda, B.
A., &amp; Morawo, I. I. (2023). Comparative
study of mechanical properties of 3D printing
materials (polylactic acid and acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene) via simulations using
COMSOL Multiphysics. Advances in
Multidisciplinary and Scientific Research
Journal, 9(3), 21–34.

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1128

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

Figure 1 A symbol of machine learning [3].

Figure 2 Evolution of machine learning [8].

Figure 3 How machine learning works [3].
@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1129

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

Figure 4 The relationship between some types of machine learning [9].

Figure 5 The relationship between AI, ML, and DL [10].

Figure 6 Some applications of machine learning [12].
@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1130

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470

Figure 7 A representation of machine learning in healthcare [15].

@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD97693 | Volume – 9 | Issue – 5 | Sep-Oct 2025

Page 1131

